23.0.0.10 staging (#3398)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-10-17-23.0.0.10.adoc

For more information on Java 21, see:

* link:https://jdk.java.net/21/release-notes[Java 21 release notes]
* link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/index.html[API Javadoc page]
* link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/migrate/getting-started.html[migration guide]

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26535
// Contact/Reviewer: jjiwooLim
// // // // // // // // 
[#feature]
== featureUtility now verifies feature signatures by default

The `featureUtility` command now verifies feature signatures before installing the feature into the Liberty runtime. 

Previously, the `featureUtilty` tool only verified checksums. While checksums are essential for integrity (showing that the file has not been tampered with), verifying checksums did not ensure the authenticity of downloaded files.

> The command now identifies whether the feature originated from the Liberty development team or is a third-party user feature. We've implemented an additional step in the process of verifying feature signatures to check both the authenticity and integrity of features that are downloaded from the Maven Central repository.

Reviewer: The last sentences here seems to be repeating (summarizing) what's been previously stated.  In other words, the section goes:
We now do authenticity checks
We only did integrity checks (and here's what an integrity check is)
We now do an authenticity check (and here's what that means)
We now do authenticity and integrity checks.

So it feels a bit redundant..... but not really a problem

Reviewer 2: I just spotted a typo in your extract, so I'll fix both now.

When running the `featureUtility` command:

* The default behavior is now `--verify=enforce`, meaning that it verifies all specified Liberty features.
* To keep the old behavior instead, you can skip the verification process by using the `--verify=skip` parameter.

> * Alternatively, you can set the verification option through environment variables or  a `featureUtility.properties` file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Alternatively, you can set the verification option through environment variables or a `featureUtility.properties` file.
```

---
layout: post
title: "Support for Java 21 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.10"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: Support for Java 21 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.10 - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Java 21 support, the first long-term support release since Java 17 two years ago. Try it now.
blog_description: Java 21 support, the first long-term support release since Java 17 two years ago. Try it now.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Support for Java 21 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.10
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Java 21 is finally here! Java 21 is the first long-term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago. It offers some new functionality and changes that you’ll want to check out for yourself. In particular, there's the introduction of Virtual Threads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Java 21 is finally here! Java 21 is the first long-term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago. It offers some new functionality and changes that you’ll want to check out for yourself. In particular, there's the introduction of virtual threads.
```

> In this release of Open Liberty, we also have an update to the `featureUtility` command; the command now verifies feature authenticity by default when you install a new feature in to Liberty.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this release of Open Liberty, we also have an update to the `featureUtility` command; the command now verifies feature authenticity by default when you install a new feature into Liberty.
```

----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/start/[Downloads page].

If you're using link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[IntelliJ IDEA], link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Open-Liberty.liberty-dev-vscode-ext[Visual Studio Code], or link:https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/liberty-tools[Eclipse IDE], try our open source link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/develop-liberty-tools.html[Liberty developer tools] for efficient development, testing, debugging, and application management, all within your IDE. 

[link=https://stackoverflow.com/tags/open-liberty]
image::img/blog/blog_btn_stack.svg[Ask a question on Stack Overflow, align="center"]

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26423
// Contact/Reviewer: gjwatts
// // // // // // // // 
[#java21]
== Support for Java 21
// The following excerpt for issue https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26192 was found in 2023-09-26-23.0.0.10-beta.adoc.
// ------ <Excerpt From Previous Post: Start> ------
// Contact/Reviewer: gjwatts
// // // // // // // // 

> Java 21 is finally here, the first long-term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago. It offers some new functionality and changes that you'll want to check out for yourself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

suggest to remove this sentence since it's already at the top of the post.

> Take advantage of trying out the new changes in Java 21 now and to test out your applications, microservices, and runtime environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Try out the new changes in Java 21 now and test your applications, microservices, and runtime environments.
```

Reviewer 4: Much better wording, thank you.

To run Open Liberty with Java 21:

1. Download and install link:https://openliberty.io/start/#runtime_releases[Open Liberty 23.0.0.10], or later.
2. Download the latest release of Java 21 from link:https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=21[adoptium.net].
3. Edit your Open Liberty runtime link:/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point `JAVA_HOME` to your Java 21 installation.
4. Start testing!

> Here are some highlights from new JEP changes in Java 18-21:

Reviewer 3: what does "18-21" mean here? Changes between Java 18 and 21?

Reviewer 4: Correct, changes between Java 18 and 21.

> Here are some highlights from new JEP changes in Java 18-21:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are some highlights of the changes between Java 18 and Java 21:
```

Reviewer 4: I think that last part with the expanded JEP definition is too verbose, what about:
`Here are some highlights of the changes between Java 18 and Java 21:`

* 400: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/400[UTF-8 by Default]
* 408: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/408[Simple Web Server]
* 413: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/413[Code Snippets in Java API Documentation]
* 416: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/416[Reimplement Core Reflection with Method Handles]
* 418: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/418[Internet-Address Resolution SPI]
* 421: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/421[Deprecate Finalization for Removal]
* 422: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/422[Linux/RISC-V Port]
* 431: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/431[Sequenced Collections]
* 439: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/439[Generational ZGC]
* 440: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/440[Record Patterns]
* 441: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/441[Pattern Matching for switch]
* 449: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/449[Deprecate the Windows 32-bit x86 Port for Removal]
* 451: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/451[Prepare to Disallow the Dynamic Loading of Agents]
* 452: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/452[Key Encapsulation Mechanism API]

> But perhaps the most anticipated one of all is the introduction of Virtual Threads in Java 21:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But perhaps the most anticipated one of all is the introduction of virtual threads in Java 21:
```

* 444: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/444[Virtual Threads]

> Will the impact of Virtual Threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by trying them out in your applications run on the best Java runtime, Open Liberty!

Reviewer 3: should we provide a sentence or two here to summarize the value/impact hype around virtual threads? Can reduce memory consumption, improve app availability and throughput etc-

Reviewer 4: Virtual threads were designed to provide higher throughput for running tasks that spend most of their time blocked, like waiting for I/O operations.

> Will the impact of Virtual Threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by trying them out in your applications run on the best Java runtime, Open Liberty!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Virtual threads were designed to provide higher throughput for running tasks that spend most of their time blocked, like waiting for I/O operations. Will the impact of virtual threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by trying them out in your applications that run on the best Java runtime, Open Liberty!
```

For more information on Java 21, see:

* link:https://jdk.java.net/21/release-notes[Java 21 release notes]
* link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/index.html[API Javadoc page]
* link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/migrate/getting-started.html[migration guide]

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26535
// Contact/Reviewer: jjiwooLim
// // // // // // // // 
[#feature]
== featureUtility now verifies feature signatures by default

> The `featureUtility` command line tool now verifies feature signatures before installing the feature in to the Liberty runtime. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `featureUtility` command now verifies feature signatures before installing the feature into the Liberty runtime. 
```

Previously, the `featureUtilty` tool only verified checksums. While checksums are essential for integrity (showing that the file has not been tampered with), verifying checksums did not ensure the authenticity of downloaded files.

The command now identifies whether the feature originated from the Liberty development team or is a third-party user feature. We've implemented an additional step in the process of verifying feature signatures to check both the authenticity and integrity of features that are downloaded from the Maven Central repository.

When running the `featureUtility` command:

* The default behavior is now `--verify=enforce`, meaning that it verifies all specified Liberty features.

> * To keep the old behavior instead, you can skip the verification process by using the parameter `--verify=skip`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* To keep the old behavior instead, you can skip the verification process by using the `--verify=skip` parameter.
```

> * You can alternatively set the verification option through environment variables or `featureUtility.properties` file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Alternatively, you can set the verification option through environment variables or  a `featureUtility.properties` file.
```

// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26423
// Contact/Reviewer: gjwatts
// // // // // // // // 
[#java21]
== Support for Java 21
// The following excerpt for issue https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26192 was found in 2023-09-26-23.0.0.10-beta.adoc.
// ------ <Excerpt From Previous Post: Start> ------
// Contact/Reviewer: gjwatts
// // // // // // // // 

Java 21 is finally here, the first long-term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago. It offers some new functionality and changes that you'll want to check out for yourself.

Take advantage of trying out the new changes in Java 21 now and to test out your applications, microservices, and runtime environments.

To run Open Liberty with Java 21:

1. Download and install the link:https://openliberty.io/start/#runtime_releases[23.0.0.10 version], or later, of Open Liberty.
2. Download the latest release of Java 21 from one of these providers:
    * link:https://jdk.java.net/21/[jdk.java.net]
    * Adoptium 
    ** link:https://adoptium.net/temurin/nightly/?version=21[Early access nightly builds]

>     ** link:https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=21[Full release] (once available)

Reviewer 4: The Java 21 Temurin builds are now available at adoptium.net, so please replace lines 97-101 with:
```
Download the latest release of Java 21 from link:https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=21[adoptium.net]
```

* 422: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/422[Linux/RISC-V Port]
* 431: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/431[Sequenced Collections]
* 439: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/439[Generational ZGC]
* 440: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/440[Record Patterns]
* 441: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/441[Pattern Matching for switch]
* 449: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/449[Deprecate the Windows 32-bit x86 Port for Removal]
* 451: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/451[Prepare to Disallow the Dynamic Loading of Agents]
* 452: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/452[Key Encapsulation Mechanism API]

But perhaps the most anticipated one of all is the introduction of Virtual Threads in Java 21:

* 444: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/444[Virtual Threads]

Will the impact of Virtual Threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by experimenting with them, or with any of the other new features in Java 21, by trying them out in your applications run on the best Java runtime, Open Liberty!

For more information on Java 21, see:

* link:https://jdk.java.net/21/release-notes[Java 21 release notes page]
* link:https://download.java.net/java/early_access/jdk21/docs/api/[API Javadoc page]

> * link:https://jdk.java.net/21/[Java 21 download page].

Reviewer 4: Lines 135-139 can be removed now, they are redundant.
